distrib/docker/README.md, before:

# Ergo Docker

This folder holds Ergo's Dockerfile and related materials. Ergo
is published automatically to the GitHub Container Registry at
[ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo](https://ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo).

Most users should use either the `stable` tag (corresponding to the
`stable` branch in git, which tracks the latest stable release), or
a tag corresponding to a tagged version (e.g. `v2.8.0`). The `master`
tag corresponds to the `master` branch, which is not recommended for
production use. The `latest` tag is not recommended.

## Quick start

The Ergo docker image is designed to work out of the box - it comes with a
usable default config and will automatically generate self-signed TLS
certificates. To get a working ircd, all you need to do is run the image and
expose the ports:

```shell
docker run --name ergo -d -p 6667:6667 -p 6697:6697 ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo:stable
```

This will start Ergo and listen on ports 6667 (plain text) and 6697 (TLS).
The first time Ergo runs it will create a config file with a randomised
oper password. This is output to stdout, and you can view it with the docker
logs command:

```shell
# Assuming your container is named `ergo`; use `docker container ls` to
# find the name if you're not sure.
docker logs ergo
```

You should see a line similar to:

```
Oper username:password is admin:cnn2tm9TP3GeI4vLaEMS
```

## Persisting data

Ergo has a persistent data store, used to keep account details, channel
registrations, and so on. To persist this data across restarts, you can mount
a volume at /ircd.

For example, to create a new docker volume and then mount it:

```shell
docker volume create ergo-data
docker run -d -v ergo-data:/ircd -p 6667:6667 -p 6697:6697 ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo:stable
```

Or to mount a folder from your host machine:

```shell
mkdir ergo-data
docker run -d -v $(PWD)/ergo-data:/ircd -p 6667:6667 -p 6697:6697 ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo:stable
```

## Customising the config

Ergo's config file is stored at /ircd/ircd.yaml. If the file does not
exist, the default config will be written out. You can copy the config from
the container, edit it, and then copy it back:

```shell
# Assuming that your container is named `ergo`, as above.
docker cp ergo:/ircd/ircd.yaml .
vim ircd.yaml # edit the config to your liking
docker cp ircd.yaml ergo:/ircd/ircd.yaml
```

You can use the `/rehash` command to make Ergo reload its config, or
send it the HUP signal:

```shell
docker kill -s SIGHUP ergo
```

## Using custom TLS certificates

TLS certs will by default be read from /ircd/tls.crt, with a private key
in /ircd/tls.key. You can customise this path in the ircd.yaml file if
you wish to mount the certificates from another volume. For information
on using Let's Encrypt certificates, see
[this manual entry](https://github.com/ergochat/ergo/blob/master/docs/MANUAL.md#using-valid-tls-certificates).

## Using docker-compose

This folder contains a sample docker-compose file which can be used
to start an Ergo instance with ports exposed and data persisted in
a docker volume. Simply download the file and then bring it up:

```shell
curl -O https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ergochat/ergo/master/distrib/docker/docker-compose.yml
docker-compose up -d
```

## Building

If you wish to manually build the docker image, you need to do so from
the root of the Ergo repository (not the `distrib/docker` directory):

```shell
docker build .
```

Commit message:

Update oragono references to ergo - Environment variable prefix - DNSBL repo URI - Project and repo names in link to Docker-specific instructions - Docker container and volume names in docker run command

distrib/docker/README.md, after:

# Ergo Docker

This folder holds Ergo's Docker compose file. The Dockerfile is in the root 
directory. Ergo is published automatically to the GitHub Container Registry at
[ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo](https://ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo).

Most users should use either the `stable` tag (corresponding to the
`stable` branch in git, which tracks the latest stable release), or
a tag corresponding to a tagged version (e.g. `v2.8.0`). The `master`
tag corresponds to the `master` branch, which is not recommended for
production use. The `latest` tag is not recommended.

## Quick start

The Ergo docker image is designed to work out of the box - it comes with a
usable default config and will automatically generate self-signed TLS
certificates. To get a working ircd, all you need to do is run the image and
expose the ports:

```shell
docker run --name ergo -d -p 6667:6667 -p 6697:6697 ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo:stable
```

This will start Ergo and listen on ports 6667 (plain text) and 6697 (TLS).
The first time Ergo runs it will create a config file with a randomised
oper password. This is output to stdout, and you can view it with the docker
logs command:

```shell
# Assuming your container is named `ergo`; use `docker container ls` to
# find the name if you're not sure.
docker logs ergo
```

You should see a line similar to:

```
Oper username:password is admin:cnn2tm9TP3GeI4vLaEMS
```

## Persisting data

Ergo has a persistent data store, used to keep account details, channel
registrations, and so on. To persist this data across restarts, you can mount
a volume at /ircd.

For example, to create a new docker volume and then mount it:

```shell
docker volume create ergo-data
docker run -d -v ergo-data:/ircd -p 6667:6667 -p 6697:6697 ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo:stable
```

Or to mount a folder from your host machine:

```shell
mkdir ergo-data
docker run -d -v $(PWD)/ergo-data:/ircd -p 6667:6667 -p 6697:6697 ghcr.io/ergochat/ergo:stable
```

## Customising the config

Ergo's config file is stored at /ircd/ircd.yaml. If the file does not
exist, the default config will be written out. You can copy the config from
the container, edit it, and then copy it back:

```shell
# Assuming that your container is named `ergo`, as above.
docker cp ergo:/ircd/ircd.yaml .
vim ircd.yaml # edit the config to your liking
docker cp ircd.yaml ergo:/ircd/ircd.yaml
```

You can use the `/rehash` command to make Ergo reload its config, or
send it the HUP signal:

```shell
docker kill -s SIGHUP ergo
```

## Using custom TLS certificates

TLS certs will by default be read from /ircd/tls.crt, with a private key
in /ircd/tls.key. You can customise this path in the ircd.yaml file if
you wish to mount the certificates from another volume. For information
on using Let's Encrypt certificates, see
[this manual entry](https://github.com/ergochat/ergo/blob/master/docs/MANUAL.md#using-valid-tls-certificates).

## Using docker-compose

This folder contains a sample docker-compose file which can be used
to start an Ergo instance with ports exposed and data persisted in
a docker volume. Simply download the file and then bring it up:

```shell
curl -O https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ergochat/ergo/master/distrib/docker/docker-compose.yml
docker-compose up -d
```

## Building

If you wish to manually build the docker image, you need to do so from
the root of the Ergo repository (not the `distrib/docker` directory):

```shell
docker build .
```
